README.md, before:

# AI Chatbot with RAG Pipeline - Frontend UI

This is a complete frontend interface for an AI chatbot with RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation) pipeline capabilities. The UI provides a clean, modern interface for document upload, chat interaction, image display, and analysis results.

## Features

### 🔄 Two-Panel Layout
- **Left Panel**: Document upload, image display, and analysis results
- **Right Panel**: Chat interface for user interactions

### 📁 Document Upload
- Drag & drop PDF file upload
- Multiple file support
- File size display and management
- Remove uploaded files functionality

### 💬 Chat Interface
- Real-time chat UI similar to ChatGPT
- Message history preservation
- Auto-resizing text input
- Keyboard shortcuts (Enter to send, Shift+Enter for new line)
- Typing indicators and timestamps

### 🖼️ Image Display
- Dynamic image display area in left panel
- Support for generated images from backend
- Responsive image container

### ✅ Analysis Results (Checklist)
- Dynamic checklist display with true/false indicators
- Visual checkmarks (✓) and crosses (✗)
- Smooth animations and hover effects

### 🎨 Modern UI/UX
- Gradient backgrounds and smooth animations
- Responsive design for mobile and desktop
- Loading overlays and notifications
- Font Awesome icons integration

## File Structure

```
AI_for_Education/
├── index.html          # Main HTML structure
├── styles.css          # Complete CSS styling
├── script.js           # JavaScript functionality
└── README.md          # This documentation
```

## Getting Started

1. **Open the application**:
   - Simply open `index.html` in a web browser
   - Or use a local server for better development experience

2. **Upload PDFs**:
   - Drag and drop PDF files into the left panel
   - Or click "Choose Files" button
   - Files will be displayed with options to remove them

3. **Chat with the AI**:
   - Type messages in the chat input area
   - Press Enter to send messages
   - View responses in the chat history

## Backend Integration

The frontend is designed to easily integrate with your backend API. Here's how to connect it:

### API Endpoint Structure

The JavaScript includes a `sendToBackend()` method that expects:

```javascript
// POST /api/chat
{
    message: "user message",
    files: [uploaded PDF files]
}
```

### Expected Backend Response Format

```javascript
{
    text: "AI response text",           // Optional
    image_url: "path/to/image.jpg",    // Optional
    checklist: {                        // Optional
        "Item 1": true,
        "Item 2": false,
        "Item 3": true
    }
}
```

### Integration Steps

1. **Update API endpoint**:
   ```javascript
   // In script.js, line ~280
   const response = await fetch('/api/chat', {
       method: 'POST',
       body: formData
   });
   ```
   Replace `/api/chat` with your actual backend endpoint.

2. **Enable real backend calls**:
   ```javascript
   // In script.js, replace simulateBackendResponse() call with:
   const response = await this.sendToBackend(message, this.uploadedFiles);
   this.handleBackendResponse(response);
   ```

3. **Handle authentication** (if needed):
   Add headers to the fetch request:
   ```javascript
   const response = await fetch('/api/chat', {
       method: 'POST',
       headers: {
           'Authorization': 'Bearer ' + yourToken
       },
       body: formData
   });
   ```

## Customization

### Colors and Themes
- Primary gradient: `#667eea` to `#764ba2`
- Success color: `#28a745`
- Error color: `#dc3545`
- Background: `#f8f9fa`

### Adding New Response Types
To add new response types from your backend:

1. Add handling in `handleBackendResponse()` method
2. Create corresponding display methods
3. Add UI sections in HTML if needed

### Example: Adding Audio Response
```javascript
// In handleBackendResponse method
if (response.audio_url) {
    this.displayAudio(response.audio_url);
}

// New method
displayAudio(audioUrl) {
    // Add audio player to left panel
}
```

## Browser Compatibility

- Chrome/Edge: Full support
- Firefox: Full support
- Safari: Full support
- Mobile browsers: Responsive design included

## Development Tips

1. **Testing without backend**:
   - The UI includes simulation modes for development
   - Test different response types using keywords:
     - "image" or "generate" → Shows image response
     - "analysis" or "check" → Shows checklist response
     - Other messages → Shows text response

2. **Debugging**:
   - Open browser dev tools to see console logs
   - Check network tab when integrating with backend
   - Use the notification system for user feedback

3. **Performance**:
   - Large files are handled with progress indicators
   - Chat history is stored in memory (consider persistence for production)
   - Images are lazy-loaded

## Production Considerations

1. **Security**:
   - Implement proper file type validation on backend
   - Add file size limits
   - Sanitize user inputs

2. **Performance**:
   - Implement pagination for chat history
   - Add image compression for large generated images
   - Consider WebSocket for real-time communication

3. **Accessibility**:
   - ARIA labels are included
   - Keyboard navigation support
   - Screen reader compatibility

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Voice input/output support
- [ ] Multi-language support
- [ ] Dark/light theme toggle
- [ ] Export chat history
- [ ] Advanced file preview
- [ ] Real-time collaboration features

---

This frontend is ready for immediate use and can be easily integrated with your RAG pipeline backend. The modular design allows for easy customization and extension as your requirements evolve.

Commit message:

Implement .env file configuration for OpenAI API key

README.md, after:

# AI Education Assistant

This is a complete AI-powered education assistant with both frontend and backend components. The application provides an intelligent interface for teachers to interact with educational content using ChatGPT API integration.

## 🚀 Quick Start

### 1. Setup
```bash
# Run the setup script
setup.bat
```

### 2. Configure API Key
1. Open the `.env` file in the project directory
2. Replace `your_openai_api_key_here` with your actual OpenAI API key:
   ```
   OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-your-actual-api-key-here
   ```
3. Get your API key from [OpenAI Platform](https://platform.openai.com/api-keys)

### 3. Start the Application
```bash
# Run the application
start_app.bat
```

Choose between:
- **AI Backend** (Real ChatGPT - requires API key)
- **Test Backend** (Mock responses - no API key needed)

## Features

### 🔄 Two-Panel Layout
- **Left Panel**: Document upload, image display, and analysis results
- **Right Panel**: Chat interface for user interactions

### 📁 Document Upload
- Drag & drop PDF file upload
- Multiple file support
- File size display and management
- Remove uploaded files functionality

### 💬 Chat Interface
- Real-time chat UI similar to ChatGPT
- Message history preservation
- Auto-resizing text input
- Keyboard shortcuts (Enter to send, Shift+Enter for new line)
- Typing indicators and timestamps

### 🖼️ Image Display
- Dynamic image display area in left panel
- Support for generated images from backend
- Responsive image container

### ✅ Analysis Results (Checklist)
- Dynamic checklist display with true/false indicators
- Visual checkmarks (✓) and crosses (✗)
- Smooth animations and hover effects

### 🎨 Modern UI/UX
- Gradient backgrounds and smooth animations
- Responsive design for mobile and desktop
- Loading overlays and notifications
- Font Awesome icons integration

## File Structure

```
AI_for_Education/
├── index.html          # Main HTML structure
├── styles.css          # Complete CSS styling
├── script.js           # JavaScript functionality
└── README.md          # This documentation
```

## Getting Started

1. **Open the application**:
   - Simply open `index.html` in a web browser
   - Or use a local server for better development experience

2. **Upload PDFs**:
   - Drag and drop PDF files into the left panel
   - Or click "Choose Files" button
   - Files will be displayed with options to remove them

3. **Chat with the AI**:
   - Type messages in the chat input area
   - Press Enter to send messages
   - View responses in the chat history

## Backend Integration

The frontend is designed to easily integrate with your backend API. Here's how to connect it:

### API Endpoint Structure

The JavaScript includes a `sendToBackend()` method that expects:

```javascript
// POST /api/chat
{
    message: "user message",
    files: [uploaded PDF files]
}
```

### Expected Backend Response Format

```javascript
{
    text: "AI response text",           // Optional
    image_url: "path/to/image.jpg",    // Optional
    checklist: {                        // Optional
        "Item 1": true,
        "Item 2": false,
        "Item 3": true
    }
}
```

### Integration Steps

1. **Update API endpoint**:
   ```javascript
   // In script.js, line ~280
   const response = await fetch('/api/chat', {
       method: 'POST',
       body: formData
   });
   ```
   Replace `/api/chat` with your actual backend endpoint.

2. **Enable real backend calls**:
   ```javascript
   // In script.js, replace simulateBackendResponse() call with:
   const response = await this.sendToBackend(message, this.uploadedFiles);
   this.handleBackendResponse(response);
   ```

3. **Handle authentication** (if needed):
   Add headers to the fetch request:
   ```javascript
   const response = await fetch('/api/chat', {
       method: 'POST',
       headers: {
           'Authorization': 'Bearer ' + yourToken
       },
       body: formData
   });
   ```

## Customization

### Colors and Themes
- Primary gradient: `#667eea` to `#764ba2`
- Success color: `#28a745`
- Error color: `#dc3545`
- Background: `#f8f9fa`

### Adding New Response Types
To add new response types from your backend:

1. Add handling in `handleBackendResponse()` method
2. Create corresponding display methods
3. Add UI sections in HTML if needed

### Example: Adding Audio Response
```javascript
// In handleBackendResponse method
if (response.audio_url) {
    this.displayAudio(response.audio_url);
}

// New method
displayAudio(audioUrl) {
    // Add audio player to left panel
}
```

## Browser Compatibility

- Chrome/Edge: Full support
- Firefox: Full support
- Safari: Full support
- Mobile browsers: Responsive design included

## Development Tips

1. **Testing without backend**:
   - The UI includes simulation modes for development
   - Test different response types using keywords:
     - "image" or "generate" → Shows image response
     - "analysis" or "check" → Shows checklist response
     - Other messages → Shows text response

2. **Debugging**:
   - Open browser dev tools to see console logs
   - Check network tab when integrating with backend
   - Use the notification system for user feedback

3. **Performance**:
   - Large files are handled with progress indicators
   - Chat history is stored in memory (consider persistence for production)
   - Images are lazy-loaded

## Production Considerations

1. **Security**:
   - Implement proper file type validation on backend
   - Add file size limits
   - Sanitize user inputs

2. **Performance**:
   - Implement pagination for chat history
   - Add image compression for large generated images
   - Consider WebSocket for real-time communication

3. **Accessibility**:
   - ARIA labels are included
   - Keyboard navigation support
   - Screen reader compatibility

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Voice input/output support
- [ ] Multi-language support
- [ ] Dark/light theme toggle
- [ ] Export chat history
- [ ] Advanced file preview
- [ ] Real-time collaboration features

---

This frontend is ready for immediate use and can be easily integrated with your RAG pipeline backend. The modular design allows for easy customization and extension as your requirements evolve.
